---
layout: post
title: "My life-changing psychedelic retreat experience"
date: 2019-10-27 09:59
comments: true
categories:
---

On October 24-27th 2019, I went on a
[retreat](https://psychedelicsociety.org.uk/experience-retreats) organized by
[The Psychedelic Society](https://psychedelicsociety.org.uk) in the
Netherlands. Since a lot of people have demonstrated interest and/or curiosity
about it, I wrote this document to record my thoughts and impressions. If
there's anything else you'd like to know that's not mentioned here, please feel
free to ask me directly!

## Retreat details and impressions

A lot of the logistics are covered in [this
document](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1mY8S7UTdnckkFMAvoYAY2h00LahjVSTz/view?usp=sharing)
they shared with us prior to the retreat. Overall I was very impressed with the
quality of the organization, every minor detail has been thoughtfully planned
and I had an amazing time. The facilitators were absolutely fantastic, very
knowledgeable, kind and helpful people. I'm deeply grateful for the work they
did and how helpful they were during the entire retreat. 

We met in a Smart Shop in Amsterdam where we bought the truffles then walked to
the Central Station where we all took a shared bus to the venue, which was ~2
hours north of Amsterdam. The venue was a beautiful, peaceful and huge house in
the middle of nowhere in the Netherlands, just nature all around. It seemed
like a small city in a quiet rural area.

![the view from my room](/images/2019/10/chairs.jpg)
*This was the view from my bedroom*

The group was composed of ~ 20 people, including 4 facilitators. We were
divided in rooms of 3-4 people each (a couple of people paid extra to stay in a
private room). It was a pretty diverse group with people from all walks of life
and ages. The vast majority was european (lots of Brits, scottish, german,
irish) and just ~3 from the US (including myself). I was probably on the
younger end of the age range, the oldest ones were probably in their
sixties/seventies (~3 people). Gender wise, it was evenly distributed. Everyone
was super friendly and open minded (as expected). There was a lot of positivity
and good vibes all around. It was easy to approach people and chat about
anything. 

On the first day, we arrived around 6pm and had some group activities until
~10pm. The activities were mostly around getting us into a relaxed state of
mind (eg.: meditation), stating people's intentions for the retreat and getting
to know each other (icebreakers, etc.). On the second day, during the morning
we did more group activities with meditation, preparation for the mushroom trip
(what to expect, etc.) in the afternoon and had 1:1s with the facilitators. The
main goal seemed to be having everyone in the right [set &
setting](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Set_and_setting) for the trip. We were
served food in the morning, all meals were 100% vegan, fresh, delicious and
cooked right there by one of the facilitators.

## The trip

![high hawaiians mushrooms](/images/2019/10/high-haweaiians.jpg)
*The magic mushrooms!*

We had a pretty high dose of mushrooms (as explained in the PDF linked above)
which was delivered in two parts, the second dose was completely optional, but
I think most people had it. We had two packs of mushrooms each, which I think
is double the "recommended" amount when buying at the shop. The tea itself
wasn't too bad, it had the aspect of a chai and was totally drinkable. I didn't
feel any nausea at all and I think most people didn't either (it happens more
often when eating the mushrooms directly instead).

My trip started pretty quickly (15-20 mins after) with lots of visuals that
seemed synchronized with the music. They played a specially curated
[playlist](https://open.spotify.com/playlist/6q0rnAIIxokcRlu6vRJPNX?si=rNkTQ76tTf2qvDSOBEDAgg)
which was absolutely amazing and was a big part of my trip. The visuals were
indescribably beautiful, very clear and vivid, something unlike anything I’ve
ever seen before. We were all laying down in individual mattresses on the floor
of a big wide open room, wearing eye masks with the goal of making the trip
more introspective.

After ~60 minutes we had the second dose which is when things started to become
intense. I became restless and felt like I was starting to lose control. People
seemed to have very different trips, some were very quietly laying down as if
they were asleep, others were very agitated, others sitting up as if
meditating. It seemed like everyone’s experiences varied widely, more
experienced folks (a couple of people were returning for their second retreat)
seemed to be having a good time and relaxed, while others (like me) were
struggling a bit/a lot more.

At some point I started crying a lot, uncontrollably so, after making some very
tough realizations related to early life traumas and issues that were
unresolved in my subconscious. Things were extremely clear in my mind during
the trip, which made me come to those realizations fairly quickly. Something
that would probably take me years of psychotherapy to achieve, I was able to
process, understand and cope with in the matter of a couple of hours, which is
quite remarkable and honestly mind blowing. The amount of thinking clarity is
absolutely incredible and really hard to put into words. A great analogy that
I’ve read in Michael Pollan’s book [How to Change Your
Mind](https://www.amazon.com/Change-Your-Mind-Consciousness-Transcendence/dp/1594204225)
(strongly recommended read if you’re interested in psychedelics btw) is:

> *"You have to imagine a caveman transported into the middle of Manhattan. He
sees buses, cell phones, skyscrapers, airplanes. Then zap him back to his cave.
What does he say about the experience? ‘It was big, it was impressive, it was
loud.’ He doesn’t have the vocabulary for ‘skyscraper,’ ‘elevator,’ ‘cell
phone.’ Maybe he has an intuitive sense there was some sort of significance or
order to the scene. But there are words we need that don’t yet exist. We’ve got
five crayons when we need fifty thousand different shades."*

It’s really something that you have to experience in order to understand but
it’s not an exaggeration to say this was life changing for me. Being able to
understand and cope with those issues is something I never expected to happen,
but as one of the facilitators told me, "you got exactly what you came here
for". I needed to go through it. I had some other very deep and meaningful
insights that I won’t go into detail here, but overall I was able to very
easily put my eye mask on and start exploring my mind, navigating back and
forth between memories and ideas. Once I got the hang of it, I could easily use
my breath to control the direction and my thoughts and focus them where I
wanted to go. It was a really powerful and meaningful experience.

After the trip I was completely exhausted and super hungry. I felt like my
brain ran a full marathon. We had dinner afterwards and I went straight to bed.
The next day I woke up with a headache and still a bit tired, which is fairly
common. Taking a painkiller helped.

## Integration

The day after the trip we had some sessions where everyone had the chance to
share something they experienced during the mushroom trip. We went around the
circle twice and each person shared something they learned, a realization,
something they deemed interesting and wanted to share with the entire group.
This was basically a group therapy session. Some people got very emotional and
cried. Others were more cheerful and shared how amazing their trips were.
Overall, most people had good experiences with a few tougher ones. I think mine
was probably on the tougher end, but I remember during it (which lasted about 6
hours) looking around the room and seeing a lot of people crying, struggling
and getting help from the facilitators. For me, their help was crucial during
the tougher moments, when one of them sit next to me, held my hand and hugged
me. If it wasn’t for that, I think it could have been way worse for me and I
wouldn’t recommend anyone to do ever do this without the help of someone else
to guide them. It can get ugly and you’ll need someone there with you should
anything go bad. Also the set & setting is extremely important, I can’t
emphasize this enough.

Overall, to reiterate, this was life changing for me. I’m still working on
unpacking, digesting and analyzing everything that happened so I can integrate
those learnings back into my day to day. If you’re still a bit curious and want
to learn more, I’d recommend reading Michael Pollan’s book and/or doing online
research. There’s plenty going on lately on this field and it’s getting more
traction around the world. This is a powerful tool that lots of people can
benefit from!


